[WIP] Blog post: API Streaming (#48513)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-11-21-API-Streaming/2024-11-21-API-Streaming.md

Reviewer: We put source code paths in lower case, by preference.

---
layout: blog
title: 'Enhancing Kubernetes API Server Efficiency with API Streaming'
date: 2024-11-21
slug: kube-apiserver-api-streaming
author: >
 Stefan Schimanski (Upbound),
 Wojciech Tyczynski (Google),
 Lukasz Szaszkiewicz (Red Hat)
---

Managing Kubernetes clusters efficiently is critical, especially as their size is growing. 
A significant challenge with large clusters is the memory overhead caused by LIST requests.

In the current implementation, kube-apiserver processes LIST requests by assembling the entire response in-memory before transmitting any data to the client. 
But what if the response body is substantial, say hundreds of megabytes? Additionally, imagine a scenario where multiple LIST requests flood in simultaneously, perhaps after a brief network outage. 
While [API Priority and Fairness](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control) has proven to reasonably protect kube-apiserver from CPU overload, its impact is visibly smaller for memory protection. 

> This can be explained by the different nature of resource consumption by a single API request - the amount of cpu used by a single request is capped by a constant, whereas the memory is proportional to the number of processed objects, which is unbounded. 

Author: I think we might need to change this sentence a bit.

This situation poses a genuine risk, potentially overwhelming and crashing any kube-apiserver within seconds due to OOM. To better visualize the issue, let's consider the below graph.

![kube-apiserver memory usage](./kube-apiserver-memory_usage.png "[kube-apiserver memory usage")

The graph shows the memory usage of a kube-apiserver during a synthetic test (see the synthetic test section for more details). 
The results clearly show that increasing the number of informers significantly boosts the server's memory consumption. 
Notably, at approximately 16:40, the server crashed when serving only 16 informers.

## Why does kube-apiserver allocate so much memory for list requests?

Our investigation revealed that this substantial memory allocation occurs because the server must:
* fetch data from the database,
* deserialize the data from its stored format,
* and finally construct the final response by converting and serializing the data into a client requested format 

> before sending the first byte to the client. This sequence results in significant temporary memory consumption. 

Reviewer 2: This breaks presentation - it should be merged with the previous sentence

---
layout: blog
title: 'Enhancing Kubernetes API Server Efficiency with API Streaming'
date: 2024-11-21
draft: true
slug: kube-apiserver-api-streaming
author: >
 Stefan Schimanski (Upbound),
 Wojciech Tyczynski (Google),
 Lukasz Szaszkiewicz (Red Hat)
---

Managing Kubernetes clusters efficiently is critical, especially as their size is growing. 

> A significant challenge with large clusters is the memory overhead caused by LIST requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A significant challenge with large clusters is the memory overhead caused by **list** requests.
```

> In the current implementation, kube-apiserver processes LIST requests by assembling the entire response in-memory before transmitting any data to the client. 
> But what if the response body is substantial, say hundreds of megabytes? Additionally, imagine a scenario where multiple LIST requests flood in simultaneously, perhaps after a brief network outage. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the existing implementation, the kube-apiserver processes **list** requests by assembling the entire response in-memory, before transmitting any data to the client.
But what if the response body is substantial, say hundreds of megabytes? Additionally, imagine a scenario where multiple **list** requests flood in simultaneously, perhaps after a brief network outage.
```

> While [API Priority and Fairness](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control) has proven to reasonably protect kube-apiserver from CPU overload, its impact is visibly smaller for memory protection. 

Reviewer: This should use a site relative path (starting with a `/`)

This can be explained by the differing nature of resource consumption by a single API request - the CPU usage at any given time is capped by a constant, whereas memory, being uncompressible, can grow proportionally with the number of processed objects and is unbounded.

> This situation poses a genuine risk, potentially overwhelming and crashing any kube-apiserver within seconds due to OOM. To better visualize the issue, let's consider the below graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This situation poses a genuine risk, potentially overwhelming and crashing any kube-apiserver within seconds due to out-of-memory (OOM) errors. To better visualize the issue, let's consider the below graph.
```

> ![kube-apiserver memory usage](./kube-apiserver-memory_usage.png "[kube-apiserver memory usage")

Reviewer: This should use a site relative path (starting with a `/`)

Reviewer: If possible, provide a vector version, or a higher-resolution raster image.

The graph shows the memory usage of a kube-apiserver during a synthetic test (see the synthetic test section for more details). 
The results clearly show that increasing the number of informers significantly boosts the server's memory consumption. 
Notably, at approximately 16:40, the server crashed when serving only 16 informers.

## Why does kube-apiserver allocate so much memory for list requests?

Our investigation revealed that this substantial memory allocation occurs because the server before sending the first byte to the client must:
* fetch data from the database,
* deserialize the data from its stored format,
* and finally construct the final response by converting and serializing the data into a client requested format 

This sequence results in significant temporary memory consumption. 
The actual usage depends on many factors like the page size, applied filters (e.g. label selectors), query parameters, and sizes of individual objects. 

> Unfortunately, neither [API Priority and Fairness](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control) nor Golang's garbage collection or Golang memory limits can prevent the system from exhausting memory under these conditions. 

Reviewer: This should use a site relative path (starting with a `/`)

The memory is allocated suddenly and rapidly, and just a few requests can quickly deplete the available memory, leading to resource exhaustion.

> Depending on how the apiserver is run on the node, it might either be killed through OOM by the kernel when exceeding the configured memory limits during these uncontrolled spikes, or if limits are not configured it might have even worse impact on the control plane node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Depending on how the API server is run on the node, it might either be killed through OOM by the kernel when exceeding the configured memory limits during these uncontrolled spikes, or if limits are not configured it might have even worse impact on the control plane node.
```

> And worst, after dying of the first apiserver, the same requests will likely hit another control plane node in an HA setup with probably the same impact. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Failures can cascade. Potentially, after the first API server failure, retries for the original requests
arrive at another control plane node in a high availability setup, with much the same impact. 
```

Potentially a situation that is hard to diagnose and hard to recover from.

> ## Streaming LIST requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Streaming list requests
```

Today, we're excited to announce a major improvement. 

> With the graduation of the WatchList feature to beta in Kubernetes 1.32, client-go users can opt-in (after explicitly enabling WatchListClient feature gate) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the graduation of the _watch lists_ feature to beta in Kubernetes 1.32, client-go users can opt-in (after explicitly enabling the `WatchListClient` feature gate)
```

> to streaming lists by switching from LIST to (a special kind of) WATCH requests. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to streaming lists by switching from **list** to (a special kind of) **watch** requests.
```

> WATCH requests are served from the watch-cache, an in-memory cache designed to improve scalability of read operations. 
> By streaming each item individually instead of returning the entire list, this method maintains constant memory overhead. 
> The server is bound by the maximum allowed size of an object in etcd plus a few additional allocations. 
> This approach drastically reduces the temporary memory usage compared to traditional LIST requests, ensuring a more efficient and stable system, 
> especially in clusters with a large number of objects of a given type or large average object sizes where despite paging memory consumption used to be high.

Reviewer: - API verbs in lower case bold
- term definitions in italics
- the response to a **list** verb is, weirdly, a _collection_ (not an object, list, or object list)

```suggestion
The API server fulfils **watch** requests are served from the _watch cache_, an in-memory cache designed to improve scalability of read operations. 
By streaming each item individually instead of returning the entire collection, the new method maintains constant memory overhead. 
The API server is bound by the maximum allowed size of an object in etcd plus a few additional allocations. 
This approach drastically reduces the temporary memory usage compared to traditional **list** requests, ensuring a more efficient and stable system, 
especially in clusters with a large number of objects of a given type or large average object sizes where despite paging memory consumption used to be high.
```

> Building on the insight gained from the synthetic test (see the synthetic test section for more details), we developed an automated performance test to systematically evaluate the impact of the WatchList feature. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building on the insight gained from the synthetic test (see the [synthetic test](#the-synthetic-test)
section for more details), we developed an automated performance test to systematically evaluate
the impact of using watch lists.
```

> This test replicates the same scenario, generating a large number of secrets with a large payload and scaling the number of informers to simulate heavy LIST request patterns. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This test replicates the same scenario, generating a large number of Secrets with a large payload,
and scaling the number of informers (a helper class in Kubernetes code) to simulate heavy **list**
request patterns.
```

The automated test is executed periodically to monitor memory usage of the server with the feature enabled and disabled.

> The results showed significant improvements with the WatchList feature enabled. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results showed significant improvements with the watch list feature enabled.
```

With the feature turned on, the kube-apiserver’s memory consumption stabilized at approximately **2 GB**. 

> In contrast, with the feature disabled, memory usage increased to approximately **20GB**, a **10x** increase! 

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
By contrast, with the feature gate disabled, memory usage increased to approximately **20GB**, a **10×** increase!
```

These results confirm the effectiveness of the new streaming API, which reduces the temporary memory footprint.

## Enabling API Streaming for your component

Upgrade to Kubernetes 1.32. Make sure your cluster uses etcd in version 3.4.31+ or 3.5.13+. 

> Enable WatchListClient for client-go. For details on enabling the feature gate in client-go, please visit https://kubernetes.io/blog/2024/08/12/feature-gates-in-client-go. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Change your client software to use watch lists. If your client code is written in Golang, you'll want to
enable the `WatchListClient` feature gate for client-go. For details on enabling the feature gate in client-go,
read [Introducing Feature Gates to Client-Go: Enhancing Flexibility and Control](/blog/2024/08/12/feature-gates-in-client-go).
```

## What's Next?

> In Kubernetes 1.32, the feature is enabled in kube-controller-manager by default despite its beta state. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Kubernetes 1.32, the newer (beta) client behavior is enabled by default in kube-controller-manager.
This means that kube-controller-manager fetches collections using watch lists, unless you explicitly
opt out.
```
?

> This will be expanded to other core components like kube-scheduler or kubelet eventually, when it is promoted to GA the latest. 

Reviewer: How about:
```suggestion
This will eventually be expanded to other core components like kube-scheduler or kubelet; once the
client-go feature becomes generally available, all the API clients within core Kubernetes will use
watch lists, if not earlier.
```

Other 3rd-party components are encouraged to opt-in to the feature during the beta phase, especially when they are at risk of accessing a large number of resources or kinds with potentially large object sizes.

> For the time being, [API Priority and Fairness](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control) assigns a reasonable small cost to LIST requests. 

Reviewer: This should use a site relative path (starting with a `/`)
```suggestion
For the time being, [API Priority and Fairness](/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control) assigns a reasonable small cost to **list** requests.
```

> This is necessary to allow enough parallelism for the average case where LISTs are cheap enough. 
> But it does not match the spiky exceptional situation of many and large objects. 
> When WatchList is used by the majority of the ecosystem, the LIST cost estimation can be changed to larger values without risking degraded performance in the average case,
> and with that increasing the protection against this kind of requests that can still hit the apiserver in the future.

Reviewer: Do you agree with:
```suggestion
API Priority and Fairness does not consider the size of collections when setting priorities or rate limits;
these controls happen before the size of the response is known.
The current small cost assigned for **list** requests allows enough parallelism for the average case
where **list** requests are cheap enough, nut it does not match the spiky exceptional situation of many
and / or large objects. 
Once the majority of the Kubernetes ecosystem has switched to watch lists, the **list** cost estimation can be changed to larger values without risking degraded performance in the average case,
and with that increasing the protection against this kind of requests that can still hit the API server in the future.
```
?

Reviewer 2: >  API Priority and Fairness does not consider the size of collections when setting priorities or rate limits;

No - this isn't true. APF *does* consider size of collection, because we take number of object (per namespace or globally) of a given type when estimating cost of the request.

> The current small cost assigned for **list** requests allows enough parallelism for the average case

That's also not true - the cost pretty well reflects the CPU cost. It doesn't reflect cost of RAM.

Reviewer: OK. Please fix the style issues, and if you want to explain the CPU vs. RAM detail, you're welcome to.

Reviewer: **Revised suggestion**
```suggestion
API Priority and Fairness does not consider the size of objects in collections when setting priorities
or rate limits; these controls happen before the size of the response is known.
Once the majority of the Kubernetes ecosystem has switched to watch lists, the **list** cost estimation can be changed a larger multiplier without risking degraded performance in the average case,
and with that increasing the protection against this kind of requests that can still hit the API server in the future.
```
?

## The synthetic test

> In order to reproduce the issue, we conducted a manual test to understand the impact of LIST request on kube-apiserver memory usage. 
> In the test, we created 400 secrets, each containing 1 MB of data, and used informers to retrieve all secrets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to reproduce the issue, we conducted a manual test to understand the impact of **list** requests on kube-apiserver memory usage. 
In the test, we created 400 Secrets, each containing 1 MB of data, and used informers to retrieve all Secrets.
```

> The results were alarming, only 16 informers were needed to cause the test server to run out of memory and crash, demonstrating how quickly memory consumption can grow under such conditions.

Reviewer: (nit)
```suggestion
The results were alarming: only 16 informers were needed to cause the test server to run out of memory and crash, demonstrating how quickly memory consumption can grow under such conditions.
```
